docs(stack): reorganize navigation into evaluate and deployment paths (#1605)
Consensys/doc.linea: docs/stack/features/index.mdx

---

> title: Capabilities

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Evaluate Lineth
sidebar_label: Overview
```

Recommend making the sidebar label "Overview" to match the index page of the "Deployment architecture" section. And title the page "Evaluate Lineth" to make clear that it is an overview of the Evaluate Lineth section.

description: Capabilities and evidence paths for evaluating a Lineth deployment
sidebar_position: 0
image: /img/socialCards/features.jpg
---

import DocCardList from "@theme/DocCardList";

export const relatedDocs = [
  {
    type: "link",
    href: "/stack/how-it-works/deployment-models",
    label: "Deployment models",
    description:
      "Compare public and private validium deployment models and their trade-offs.",
  },
  {
    type: "link",
    href: "/stack/how-it-works/data-availability-finalization",
    label: "Data availability and finalization",
    description:
      "How deployment choices affect data availability and finalization.",
  },

> ];

Reviewer: Can we omit this component from this page, since there's already a table linking out to where to go next? This additional "related docs" section feels random, it's unclear why those two pages are chosen.

Use this page to scan Lineth capabilities that matter when evaluating a
deployment, and to find the pages that go deeper on each one. For design choices
and operator responsibilities, continue to
[deployment architecture](../how-it-works/index.mdx).

## What Lineth provides

Lineth is a ZK-rollup stack. A deployment combines a consensus layer, an
execution layer, a Prover, a Coordinator, and a set of onchain contracts on a
finalization layer. Operators choose the deployment model, data availability
arrangement, finalization layer, and access controls.

The capabilities below are scoped by the deployment model an operator chooses.

> None of them is a product, SLA, or commercial packaging claim.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following capabilities depend on the deployment model chosen.
```

I don't think the second line adds anything that's not already clear, and it reads pretty AI-generated.

## Deployment model capabilities

Using Lineth, an operator can deploy:

- Public networks, such as Linea Mainnet, with onchain data availability
- Private validium networks, with offchain data availability and controlled
  access

> - Custom L2 or L3 networks that finalize on Ethereum or on Linea Mainnet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This list reads as 3 independent options, but when you go into the deployment models page only the public + private options are presented, which is confusing. Recommend removing the extra bullet point and keeping that info separate.

Single-validator deployments do not use QBFT and rely on the operator trust
model instead. For the trust assumptions per model, see
[Trust and responsibilities](../how-it-works/trust-model.mdx).

### Dual-layer architecture

Lineth separates consensus and execution. This lets operators choose different
client configurations and scale consensus and execution independently. It does
not by itself provide client diversity or network resilience; those depend on
the operator's deployment.

## Where to go next

| Question                                                        | Page                                                                                     |
| --------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Who operates what, and what can each component do?              | [Trust and responsibilities](../how-it-works/trust-model.mdx)                            |
| Who can see what data?                                          | [Privacy and data visibility](./validium.mdx)                                            |

> | What is protocol versus operator, and what evidence exists?     | [Security and assurance](./security.mdx)                                                 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| What does the protocol guarantee, and what evidence exists?     | [Security and assurance](./security.mdx)                                                 |
```

| What protocol evidence can operators use for compliance design? | [Compliance](./compliance.mdx)                                                           |
| How do data availability and finalization choices interact?     | [Data availability and finalization](../how-it-works/data-availability-finalization.mdx) |

> | How is access to RPC and APIs controlled?                       | [Access control](./rbac.mdx)                                                             |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Recommend removing these from the table because they're categorized as deployment architecture, not evaluator material.
